chunk: DIRECTIVE 2006/54/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 5 July 2006
on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and
women in matters of employment and occupation (recast)
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION,
Having regard to the Treaty establishing the European Commu-
nity, and in particular Article 141(3) thereof,
Having regard to the proposal from the Commission,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and
Social Committee (1),
Acting in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 251
of the Treaty (2),
Whereas:
(1) Council Directive 76/207/EEC of 9 February 1976 on the
implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men
and women as regards access to employment, vocationaltraining and promotion, and working conditions (
3) and
Council Directive 86/378/EEC of 24 July 1986 on theimplementation of the principle of equal treatment for menand women in occupational social security schemes (
4) have
been significantly amended (5). Council Directive 75/117/
EEC of 10 February 1975 on the approximation of the lawsof the Member States relating to the application of theprinciple of equal pay for men and women (
6) and
Council Directive 97/80/EC of 15 December 1997 on theburden of proof in cases of discrimination based on sex (
7)
also contain provisions which have as their purpose the
implementation of the principle of equal treatment betweenmen and women. Now that new amendments are beingmade to the said Directives, it is desirable, for reasons ofclarity, that the provisions in question should be recast bybringing together in a single text the main provisionsexisting in this field as well as certain developments arisingout of the case-law of the Court of Justice of the EuropeanCommunities (hereinafter referred to as the Court ofJustice).(2) Equality between men and women is a fundamental
principle of Community law under Article 2 and Article 3
(2) of the Treaty and the case-law of the Court of Justice.Those Treaty provisions proclaim equality between menand women as a ‘task’ and an ‘aim’ of the Community and
impose a positive obligation to promote it in all itsactivities.
(3) The Court of Justice has held that the scope of the principle
of equal treatment for men and women cannot be confined
to the prohibition of discrimination based on the fact that aperson is of one or other sex. In view of its purpose and thenature of the rights which it seeks to safeguard, it alsoapplies to discrimination arising from the gender reassign-ment of a person.
(4) Article 141(3) of the Treaty now provides a specific legal
basis for the adoption of Community measures to ensure
the application of the principle of equal opportunities andequal treatment in matters of employment and occupation,including the principle of equal pay for equal work or workof equal value.
(5) Articles 21 and 23 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
the European Union also prohibit any discrimination on
grounds of sex and enshrine the right to equal treatmentbetween men and women in all areas, including employ-ment, work and pay.
(6) Harassment and sexual harassment are contrary to the
principle of equal treatment between men and women and
constitute discrimination on grounds of sex for thepurposes of this Directive. These forms of discriminationoccur not only in the workplace, but also in the context ofaccess to employment, vocational training and promotion.They should therefore be prohibited and should be subjectto effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties.
(7) In this context, employers and those responsible for
vocational training should be encouraged to take measures
to combat all forms of discrimination on grounds of sexand, in particular, to take preventive measures againstharassment and sexual harassment in the workplace and inaccess to employment, vocational training and promotion,in accordance with national law and practice.
(8) The principle of equal pay for equal work or work of equal
value as laid down by Article 141 of the Treaty and
consistently upheld in the case-law of the Court of Justiceconstitutes an important aspect of the principle of equaltreatment between men and women and an essential and26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/23
(1) OJ C 157, 28.6.2005, p. 83.
(2) Opinion of the European Parliament of 6 July 2005 (not yet
published in the Official Journal), Council Common Position of10 March 2006(OJ C 126 E, 30.5.2006, p. 33) and Position of theEuropean Parliament of 1 June 2006 (not yet published in theOfficial Journal).
(
3) OJ L 39, 14.2.1976, p. 40. Directive as amended by Directive 2002/
73/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 269,5.10.2002, p. 15).
(
4) OJ L 225, 12.8.1986, p. 40. Directive as amended by Directive 96/
97/EC (OJ L 46, 17.2.1997, p. 20).
(5) See Annex I Part A.
(6) OJ L 45, 19.2.1975, p. 19.
(7) OJ L 14, 20.1.1998, p. 6. Directive as amended by Directive 98/52/
EC (OJ L 205, 22.7.1998, p. 66). indispensable part of the acquis communautaire, including the
case-law of the Court concerning sex discrimination. It istherefore appropriate to make further provision for itsimplementation.
(9) In accordance with settled case-law of the Court of Justice,
in order to assess whether workers are performing the same
work or work of equal value, it should be determinedwhether, having regard to a range of factors including thenature of the work and training and working conditions,those workers may be considered to be in a comparablesituation.
(10) The Court of Justice has established that, in certain
circumstances, the principle of equal pay is not limited to
situations in which men and women work for the sameemployer.
(11) The Member States, in collaboration with the social
partners, should continue to address the problem of the
continuing gender-based wage differentials and markedgender segregation on the labour market by means such asflexible working time arrangements which enable both menand women to combine family and work commitmentsmore successfully. This could also include appropriateparental leave arrangements which could be taken up byeither parent as well as the provision of accessible andaffordable child-care facilities and care for dependentpersons.
(12) Specific measures should be adopted to ensure the
implementation of the principle of equal treatment in
occupational social security schemes and to define its scopemore clearly.
(13) In its judgment of 17 May 1990 in Case C-262/88 (1), the
Court of Justice determined that all forms of occupational
pension constitute an element of pay within the meaning ofArticle 141 of the Treaty.
(14) Although the concept of pay within the meaning of
Article 141 of the Treaty does not encompass social
security benefits, it is now clearly established that a pensionscheme for public servants falls within the scope of theprinciple of equal pay if the benefits payable under thescheme are paid to the worker by reason of his/heremployment relationship with the public employer,notwithstanding the fact that such scheme forms part ofa general statutory scheme. According to the judgments ofthe Court of Justice in Cases C-7/93 (
2) and C-351/00 (3),
that condition will be satisfied if the pension schemeconcerns a particular category of workers and its benefitsare directly related to the period of service and calculated byreference to the public servant's final salary. For reasons ofclarity, it is therefore appropriate to make specific provisionto that effect.(15) The Court of Justice has confirmed that whilst the
contributions of male and female workers to a defined-
benefit pension scheme are covered by Article 141 of theTreaty, any inequality in employers' contributions paidunder funded defined-benefit schemes which is due to theuse of actuarial factors differing according to sex is not tobe assessed in the light of that same provision.
(16) By way of example, in the case of funded defined‑benefit
schemes, certain elements, such as conversion into a capital
sum of part of a periodic pension, transfer of pensionrights, a reversionary pension payable to a dependant inreturn for the surrender of part of a pension or a reducedpension where the worker opts to take earlier retirement,may be unequal where the inequality of the amounts resultsfrom the effects of the use of actuarial factors differingaccording to sex at the time when the scheme's funding isimplemented.
(17) It is well established that benefits payable under occupa-
tional social security schemes are not to be considered as
remuneration insofar as they are attributable to periods ofemployment prior to 17 May 1990, except in the case ofworkers or those claiming under them who initiated legalproceedings or brought an equivalent claim under theapplicable national law before that date. It is thereforenecessary to limit the implementation of the principle ofequal treatment accordingly.
(18) The Court of Justice has consistently held that the Barber
Protocol (4) does not affect the right to join an occupational
pension scheme and that the limitation of the effects intime of the judgment in Case C-262/88 does not apply tothe right to join an occupational pension scheme. TheCourt of Justice also ruled that the national rules relating totime limits for bringing actions under national law may berelied on against workers who assert their right to join anoccupational pension scheme, provided that they are notless favourable for that type of action than for similaractions of a domestic nature and that they do not renderthe exercise of rights conferred by Community lawimpossible in practice. The Court of Justice has alsopointed out that the fact that a worker can claimretroactively to join an occupational pension scheme doesnot allow the worker to avoid paying the contributionsrelating to the period of membership concerned.
(19) Ensuring equal access to employment and the vocational
training leading thereto is fundamental to the application of
the principle of equal treatment of men and women inmatters of employment and occupation. Any exception tothis principle should therefore be limited to thoseoccupational activities which necessitate the employmentof a person of a particular sex by reason of their nature orthe context in which they are carried out, provided that theobjective sought is legitimate and complies with theprinciple of proportionality.L 204/24 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006
(1) C-262/88: Barber v Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance Group
(1990 ECR I‑1889).
(2) C-7/93: Bestuur van het Algemeen Burgerlijk Pensioenfonds v G. A.
Beune (1994 ECR I‑4471).
(3) C-351/00: Pirkko Niemi (2002 ECR I-7007).(4) Protocol 17 concerning Article 141 of the Treaty establishing the
European Community (1992). (20) This Directive does not prejudice freedom of association,
including the right to establish unions with others and to
join unions to defend one's interests. Measures within themeaning of Article 141(4) of the Treaty may includemembership or the continuation of the activity oforganisations or unions whose main objective is thepromotion, in practice, of the principle of equal treatmentbetween men and women.
(21) The prohibition of discrimination should be without
prejudice to the maintenance or adoption of measures
intended to prevent or compensate for disadvantagessuffered by a group of persons of one sex. Such measurespermit organisations of persons of one sex where theirmain object is the promotion of the special needs of thosepersons and the promotion of equality between men andwomen.
(22) In accordance with Article 141(4) of the Treaty, with a view
to ensuring full equality in practice between men and
women in working life, the principle of equal treatmentdoes not prevent Member States from maintaining oradopting measures providing for specific advantages inorder to make it easier for the under-represented sex topursue a vocational activity or to prevent or compensate fordisadvantages in professional careers. Given the currentsituation and bearing in mind Declaration No 28 to theAmsterdam Treaty, Member States should, in the firstinstance, aim at improving the situation of women inworking life.
(23) It is clear from the case-law of the Court of Justice that
unfavourable treatment of a woman related to pregnancy or
maternity constitutes direct discrimination on grounds ofsex. Such treatment should therefore be expressly coveredby this Directive.
(24) The Court of Justice has consistently recognised the
legitimacy, as regards the principle of equal treatment, of
protecting a woman's biological condition during preg-nancy and maternity and of introducing maternityprotection measures as a means to achieve substantiveequality. This Directive should therefore be withoutprejudice to Council Directive 92/85/EEC of 19 October1992 on the introduction of measures to encourageimprovements in the safety and health at work of pregnantworkers and workers who have recently given birth or arebreastfeeding (
1). This Directive should further be without
prejudice to Council Directive 96/34/EC of 3 June 1996 onthe framework agreement on parental leave concluded byUNICE, CEEP and the ETUC (
2).
(25) For reasons of clarity, it is also appropriate to make express
provision for the protection of the employment rights of
women on maternity leave and in particular their right toreturn to the same or an equivalent post, to suffer nodetriment in their terms and conditions as a result of takingsuch leave and to benefit from any improvement inworking conditions to which they would have been entitled
during their absence.
(26) In the Resolution of the Council and of the Ministers for
Employment and Social Policy, meeting within the Council,
of 29 June 2000 on the balanced participation of women
and men in family and working life (3), Member States were
encouraged to consider examining the scope for theirrespective legal systems to grant working men an individualand non‑transferable right to paternity leave, whilemaintaining their rights relating to employment.
(27) Similar considerations apply to the granting by Member
States to men and women of an individual and non-
transferable right to leave subsequent to the adoption of achild. It is for the Member States to determine whether ornot to grant such a right to paternity and/or adoption leaveand also to determine any conditions, other than dismissaland return to work, which are outside the scope of thisDirective.
(28) The effective implementation of the principle of equal
treatment requires appropriate procedures to be put in
place by the Member States.
(29) The provision of adequate judicial or administrative
procedures for the enforcement of the obligations imposed
by this Directive is essential to the effective implementationof the principle of equal treatment.
(30) The adoption of rules on the burden of proof plays a
significant role in ensuring that the principle of equal
treatment can be effectively enforced. As the Court ofJustice has held, provision should therefore be made toensure that the burden of proof shifts to the respondentwhen there is a prima facie case of discrimination, except in
relation to proceedings in which it is for the court or othercompetent national body to investigate the facts. It ishowever necessary to clarify that the appreciation of the
facts from which it may be presumed that there has been
direct or indirect discrimination remains a matter for therelevant national body in accordance with national law orpractice. Further, it is for the Member States to introduce, atany appropriate stage of the proceedings, rules of evidencewhich are more favourable to plaintiffs.
(31) With a view to further improving the level of protection
offered by this Directive, associations, organisations and
other legal entities should also be empowered to engage inproceedings, as the Member States so determine, either onbehalf or in support of a complainant, without prejudice tonational rules of procedure concerning representation anddefence.
(32) Having regard to the fundamental nature of the right to
effective legal protection, it is appropriate to ensure that
workers continue to enjoy such protection even after therelationship giving rise to an alleged breach of the principle26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/25
(1) OJ L 348, 28.11.1992, p. 1.
(2) OJ L 145, 19.6.1996, p. 4. Directive as amended by Directive 97/75/
EC (OJ L 10, 16.1.1998, p. 24). (3) OJ C 218, 31.7.2000, p. 5. of equal treatment has ended. An employee defending or
giving evidence on behalf of a person protected under thisDirective should be entitled to the same protection.
(33) It has been clearly established by the Court of Justice that in
order to be effective, the principle of equal treatment
implies that the compensation awarded for any breach mustbe adequate in relation to the damage sustained. It istherefore appropriate to exclude the fixing of any priorupper limit for such compensation, except where theemployer can prove that the only damage suffered by anapplicant as a result of discrimination within the meaningof this Directive was the refusal to take his/her jobapplication into consideration.
(34) In order to enhance the effective implementation of the
principle of equal treatment, Member States should
promote dialogue between the social partners and, withinthe framework of national practice, with non-governmentalorganisations.
(35) Member States should provide for effective, proportionate
and dissuasive penalties for breaches of the obligations
under this Directive.
(36) Since the objectives of this Directive cannot be sufficiently
achieved by the Member States and can therefore be better
achieved at Community level, the Community may adoptmeasures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity asset out in Article 5 of the Treaty. In accordance with theprinciple of proportionality, as set out in that Article, thisDirective does not go beyond what is necessary in order to
achieve those objectives.
(37) For the sake of a better understanding of the different
treatment of men and women in matters of employment
and occupation, comparable statistics disaggregated by sexshould continue to be developed, analysed and madeavailable at the appropriate levels.
(38) Equal treatment of men and women in matters of
employment and occupation cannot be restricted to
legislative measures. Instead, the European Union and theMember States should continue to promote the raising ofpublic awareness of wage discrimination and the changingof public attitudes, involving all parties concerned at publicand private level to the greatest possible extent. Thedialogue between the social partners could play animportant role in this process.
(39) The obligation to transpose this Directive into national law
should be confined to those provisions which represent a
substantive change as compared with the earlier Directives.The obligation to transpose the provisions which aresubstantially unchanged arises under the earlier Directives.
(40) This Directive should be without prejudice to the
obligations of the Member States relating to the time limits
for transposition into national law and application of theDirectives set out in Annex I, Part B.(41) In accordance with paragraph 34 of the Interinstitutional
agreement on better law‑making (1), Member States are
encouraged to draw up, for themselves and in the interest ofthe Community, their own tables, which will, as far aspossible, illustrate the correlation between this Directiveand the transposition measures and to make them public,
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

chunk: TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1
Purpose
The purpose of this Directive is to ensure the implementation of
the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of menand women in matters of employment and occupation.
To that end, it contains provisions to implement the principle of
equal treatment in relation to:
(a) access to employment, including promotion, and to
vocational training;
(b) working conditions, including pay;(c) occupational social security schemes.It also contains provisions to ensure that such implementation is
made more effective by the establishment of appropriateprocedures.
Article 2
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions
shall apply:
(a) ‘direct discrimination’: where one person is treated less
favourably on grounds of sex than another is, has been orwould be treated in a comparable situation;
(b) ‘indirect discrimination’: where an apparently neutral
provision, criterion or practice would put persons of onesex at a particular disadvantage compared with persons ofthe other sex, unless that provision, criterion or practice isobjectively justified by a legitimate aim, and the means ofachieving that aim are appropriate and necessary;
(c) ‘harassment ’: where unwanted conduct related to the sex of
a person occurs with the purpose or effect of violating thedignity of a person, and of creating an intimidating, hostile,degrading, humiliating or offensive environment;L 204/26 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006
(1) OJ C 321, 31.12.2003, p. 1. (d) ‘sexual harassment’ : where any form of unwanted verbal,
non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature occurs,with the purpose or effect of violating the dignity of aperson, in particular when creating an intimidating, hostile,degrading, humiliating or offensive environment;
(e) ‘pay’: the ordinary basic or minimum wage or salary and
any other consideration, whether in cash or in kind, whichthe worker receives directly or indirectly, in respect of his/her employment from his/her employer;
(f) ‘occupational social security schemes ’: schemes not gov-
erned by Council Directive 79/7/EEC of 19 December 1978on the progressive implementation of the principle of equaltreatment for men and women in matters of social
security (
1) whose purpose is to provide workers, whether
employees or self-employed, in an undertaking or group ofundertakings, area of economic activity, occupational sectoror group of sectors with benefits intended to supplementthe benefits provided by statutory social security schemesor to replace them, whether membership of such schemesis compulsory or optional.
2. For the purposes of this Directive, discrimination includes:(a) harassment and sexual harassment, as well as any less
favourable treatment based on a person's rejection of orsubmission to such conduct;
(b) instruction to discriminate against persons on grounds of
sex;
(c) any less favourable treatment of a woman related to
pregnancy or maternity leave within the meaning ofDirective 92/85/EEC.
Article 3
Positive action
Member States may maintain or adopt measures within the
meaning of Article 141(4) of the Treaty with a view to ensuringfull equality in practice between men and women in working life.
chunk: TITLE II
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
Equal pay
Article 4
Prohibition of discrimination
For the same work or for work to which equal value is attributed,
direct and indirect discrimination on grounds of sex with regardto all aspects and conditions of remuneration shall be eliminated.
In particular, where a job classification system is used for
determining pay, it shall be based on the same criteria for bothmen and women and so drawn up as to exclude anydiscrimination on grounds of sex.
CHAPTER 2
Equal treatment in occupational social security schemes
Article 5
Prohibition of discrimination
Without prejudice to Article 4, there shall be no direct or indirect
discrimination on grounds of sex in occupational social securityschemes, in particular as regards:
(a) the scope of such schemes and the conditions of access to
them;
(b) the obligation to contribute and the calculation of
contributions;
(c) the calculation of benefits, including supplementary
benefits due in respect of a spouse or dependants, andthe conditions governing the duration and retention ofentitlement to benefits.
Article 6
Personal scope
This Chapter shall apply to members of the working population,
including self-employed persons, persons whose activity isinterrupted by illness, maternity, accident or involuntaryunemployment and persons seeking employment and to retiredand disabled workers, and to those claiming under them, inaccordance with national law and/or practice.26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/27
(1) OJ L 6, 10.1.1979, p. 24. Article 7
Material scope
1. This Chapter applies to:
(a) occupational social security schemes which provide
protection against the following risks:
(i) sickness,(ii) invalidity,
(iii) old age, including early retirement,
(iv) industrial accidents and occupational diseases,(v) unemployment;
(b) occupational social security schemes which provide for
other social benefits, in cash or in kind, and in particular
survivors' benefits and family allowances, if such benefits
constitute a consideration paid by the employer to theworker by reason of the latter's employment.
2. This Chapter also applies to pension schemes for a particular
category of worker such as that of public servants if the benefitspayable under the scheme are paid by reason of the employmentrelationship with the public employer. The fact that such ascheme forms part of a general statutory scheme shall be withoutprejudice in that respect.
Article 8
Exclusions from the material scope
1. This Chapter does not apply to:
(a) individual contracts for self-employed persons;
(b) single-member schemes for self-employed persons;(c) insurance contracts to which the employer is not a party, in
the case of workers;
(d) optional provisions of occupational social security schemes
offered to participants individually to guarantee them:
(i) either additional benefits,
(ii) or a choice of date on which the normal benefits for
self-employed persons will start, or a choice betweenseveral benefits;
(e) occupational social security schemes in so far as benefits are
financed by contributions paid by workers on a voluntarybasis.2. This Chapter does not preclude an employer granting to
persons who have already reached the retirement age for thepurposes of granting a pension by virtue of an occupationalsocial security scheme, but who have not yet reached theretirement age for the purposes of granting a statutoryretirement pension, a pension supplement, the aim of which isto make equal or more nearly equal the overall amount of benefitpaid to these persons in relation to the amount paid to personsof the other sex in the same situation who have already reachedthe statutory retirement age, until the persons benefiting fromthe supplement reach the statutory retirement age.
Article 9
Examples of discrimination
1. Provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment shall
include those based on sex, either directly or indirectly, for:
(a) determining the persons who may participate in an
occupational social security scheme;
(b) fixing the compulsory or optional nature of participation in
an occupational social security scheme;
(c) laying down different rules as regards the age of entry into
the scheme or the minimum period of employment ormembership of the scheme required to obtain the benefitsthereof;
(d) laying down different rules, except as provided for in points
(h) and (j), for the reimbursement of contributions when aworker leaves a scheme without having fulfilled theconditions guaranteeing a deferred right to long-termbenefits;
(e) setting different conditions for the granting of benefits or
restricting such benefits to workers of one or other of thesexes;
(f) fixing different retirement ages;
(g) suspending the retention or acquisition of rights during
periods of maternity leave or leave for family reasons whichare granted by law or agreement and are paid by theemployer;
(h) setting different levels of benefit, except in so far as may be
necessary to take account of actuarial calculation factorswhich differ according to sex in the case of defined-contribution schemes; in the case of funded defined-benefitschemes, certain elements may be unequal where theinequality of the amounts results from the effects of the useof actuarial factors differing according to sex at the timewhen the scheme's funding is implemented;L 204/28 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006 (i) setting different levels for workers' contributions;
(j) setting different levels for employers' contributions, except:
(i) in the case of defined-contribution schemes if the aim
is to equalise the amount of the final benefits or tomake them more nearly equal for both sexes,
(ii) in the case of funded defined-benefit schemes where
the employer's contributions are intended to ensurethe adequacy of the funds necessary to cover the costof the benefits defined;
(k) laying down different standards or standards applicable
only to workers of a specified sex, except as provided for inpoints (h) and (j), as regards the guarantee or retention ofentitlement to deferred benefits when a worker leaves ascheme.
2. Where the granting of benefits within the scope of this
Chapter is left to the discretion of the scheme's managementbodies, the latter shall comply with the principle of equaltreatment.
Article 10
Implementation as regards self-employed persons
1. Member States shall take the necessary steps to ensure that
the provisions of occupational social security schemes for self-employed persons contrary to the principle of equal treatmentare revised with effect from 1 January 1993 at the latest or forMember States whose accession took place after that date, at thedate that Directive 86/378/EEC became applicable in theirterritory.
2. This Chapter shall not preclude rights and obligations
relating to a period of membership of an occupational socialsecurity scheme for self-employed persons prior to revision ofthat scheme from remaining subject to the provisions of thescheme in force during that period.
Article 11
Possibility of deferral as regards self-employed persons
As regards occupational social security schemes for self-
employed persons, Member States may defer compulsoryapplication of the principle of equal treatment with regard to:
(a) determination of pensionable age for the granting of old-
age or retirement pensions, and the possible implicationsfor other benefits:
(i) either until the date on which such equality is achieved
in statutory schemes,
(ii) or, at the latest, until such equality is prescribed by a
directive;(b) survivors' pensions until Community law establishes the
principle of equal treatment in statutory social securityschemes in that regard;
(c) the application of Article 9(1)(i) in relation to the use of
actuarial calculation factors, until 1 January 1999 or forMember States whose accession took place after that dateuntil the date that Directive 86/378/EEC became applicablein their territory.
Article 12
Retroactive effect
1. Any measure implementing this Chapter, as regards workers,
shall cover all benefits under occupational social securityschemes derived from periods of employment subsequent to17 May 1990 and shall apply retroactively to that date, withoutprejudice to workers or those claiming under them who have,before that date, initiated legal proceedings or raised anequivalent claim under national law. In that event, theimplementation measures shall apply retroactively to 8 April1976 and shall cover all the benefits derived from periods ofemployment after that date. For Member States which acceded tothe Community after 8 April 1976, and before 17 May 1990, thatdate shall be replaced by the date on which Article 141 of theTreaty became applicable in their territory.
2. The second sentence of paragraph 1 shall not prevent
national rules relating to time limits for bringing actions undernational law from being relied on against workers or those
claiming under them who initiated legal proceedings or raised an
equivalent claim under national law before 17 May 1990,provided that they are not less favourable for that type of actionthan for similar actions of a domestic nature and that they do notrender the exercise of rights conferred by Community lawimpossible in practice.
3. For Member States whose accession took place after 17 May
1990 and which were on 1 January 1994 Contracting Parties tothe Agreement on the European Economic Area, the date of17 May 1990 in the first sentence of paragraph 1 shall bereplaced by 1 January 1994.
4. For other Member States whose accession took place after
17 May 1990, the date of 17 May 1990 in paragraphs 1 and 2shall be replaced by the date on which Article 141 of the Treatybecame applicable in their territory.
Article 13
Flexible pensionable age
Where men and women may claim a flexible pensionable age
under the same conditions, this shall not be deemed to beincompatible with this Chapter.26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/29 CHAPTER 3
Equal treatment as regards access to employment, vocational
training and promotion and working conditions
Article 14
Prohibition of discrimination
1. There shall be no direct or indirect discrimination on
grounds of sex in the public or private sectors, including publicbodies, in relation to:
(a) conditions for access to employment, to self-employment
or to occupation, including selection criteria and recruit-ment conditions, whatever the branch of activity and at alllevels of the professional hierarchy, including promotion;
(b) access to all types and to all levels of vocational guidance,
vocational training, advanced vocational training andretraining, including practical work experience;
(c) employment and working conditions, including dismissals,
as well as pay as provided for in Article 141 of the Treaty;
(d) membership of, and involvement in, an organisation of
workers or employers, or any organisation whose memberscarry on a particular profession, including the benefitsprovided for by such organisations.
2. Member States may provide, as regards access to employ-
ment including the training leading thereto, that a difference oftreatment which is based on a characteristic related to sex shallnot constitute discrimination where, by reason of the nature ofthe particular occupational activities concerned or of the contextin which they are carried out, such a characteristic constitutes agenuine and determining occupational requirement, providedthat its objective is legitimate and the requirement is propor-tionate.
Article 15
Return from maternity leave
A woman on maternity leave shall be entitled, after the end of
her period of maternity leave, to return to her job or to anequivalent post on terms and conditions which are no lessfavourable to her and to benefit from any improvement inworking conditions to which she would have been entitledduring her absence.
Article 16
Paternity and adoption leave
This Directive is without prejudice to the right of Member States
to recognise distinct rights to paternity and/or adoption leave.Those Member States which recognise such rights shall take thenecessary measures to protect working men and women againstdismissal due to exercising those rights and ensure that, at theend of such leave, they are entitled to return to their jobs or to
equivalent posts on terms and conditions which are no lessfavourable to them, and to benefit from any improvement inworking conditions to which they would have been entitledduring their absence.

chunk: TITLE III
HORIZONTAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
Remedies and enforcement
Section 1
Remedies
Article 17
Defence of rights
1. Member States shall ensure that, after possible recourse to
other competent authorities including where they deem itappropriate conciliation procedures, judicial procedures for the
enforcement of obligations under this Directive are available to
all persons who consider themselves wronged by failure to applythe principle of equal treatment to them, even after therelationship in which the discrimination is alleged to haveoccurred has ended.
2. Member States shall ensure that associations, organisations
or other legal entities which have, in accordance with the criterialaid down by their national law, a legitimate interest in ensuringthat the provisions of this Directive are complied with, mayengage, either on behalf or in support of the complainant, withhis/her approval, in any judicial and/or administrative procedureprovided for the enforcement of obligations under this Directive.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 are without prejudice to national rules
relating to time limits for bringing actions as regards theprinciple of equal treatment.
Article 18
Compensation or reparation
Member States shall introduce into their national legal systems
such measures as are necessary to ensure real and effectivecompensation or reparation as the Member States so determinefor the loss and damage sustained by a person injured as a resultof discrimination on grounds of sex, in a way which is dissuasiveand proportionate to the damage suffered. Such compensation orreparation may not be restricted by the fixing of a prior upperlimit, except in cases where the employer can prove that the onlydamage suffered by an applicant as a result of discriminationwithin the meaning of this Directive is the refusal to take his/herjob application into consideration.L 204/30 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006 Section 2
Burden of proof
Article 19
Burden of proof
1. Member States shall take such measures as are necessary, in
accordance with their national judicial systems, to ensure that,when persons who consider themselves wronged because theprinciple of equal treatment has not been applied to themestablish, before a court or other competent authority, facts fromwhich it may be presumed that there has been direct or indirectdiscrimination, it shall be for the respondent to prove that therehas been no breach of the principle of equal treatment.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not prevent Member States from
introducing rules of evidence which are more favourable toplaintiffs.
3. Member States need not apply paragraph 1 to proceedings
in which it is for the court or competent body to investigate thefacts of the case.
4. Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall also apply to:(a) the situations covered by Article 141 of the Treaty and,
insofar as discrimination based on sex is concerned, byDirectives 92/85/EEC and 96/34/EC;
(b) any civil or administrative procedure concerning the public
or private sector which provides for means of redress undernational law pursuant to the measures referred to in (a) withthe exception of out-of-court procedures of a voluntarynature or provided for in national law.
5. This Article shall not apply to criminal procedures, unless
otherwise provided by the Member States.
CHAPTER 2
Promotion of equal treatment —dialogue
Article 20
Equality bodies
1. Member States shall designate and make the necessary
arrangements for a body or bodies for the promotion, analysis,monitoring and support of equal treatment of all personswithout discrimination on grounds of sex. These bodies mayform part of agencies with responsibility at national level for thedefence of human rights or the safeguard of individuals' rights.
2. Member States shall ensure that the competences of these
bodies include:
(a) without prejudice to the right of victims and of associa-
tions, organisations or other legal entities referred to inArticle 17(2), providing independent assistance to victimsof discrimination in pursuing their complaints about
discrimination;
(b) conducting independent surveys concerning discrimina-
tion;
(c) publishing independent reports and making recommenda-
tions on any issue relating to such discrimination;
(d) at the appropriate level exchanging available information
with corresponding European bodies such as any futureEuropean Institute for Gender Equality.
Article 21
Social dialogue
1. Member States shall, in accordance with national traditions
and practice, take adequate measures to promote social dialoguebetween the social partners with a view to fostering equaltreatment, including, for example, through the monitoring ofpractices in the workplace, in access to employment, vocationaltraining and promotion, as well as through the monitoring ofcollective agreements, codes of conduct, research or exchange ofexperience and good practice.
2. Where consistent with national traditions and practice,
Member States shall encourage the social partners, withoutprejudice to their autonomy, to promote equality between menand women, and flexible working arrangements, with the aim offacilitating the reconciliation of work and private life, and toconclude, at the appropriate level, agreements laying down anti-discrimination rules in the fields referred to in Article 1 whichfall within the scope of collective bargaining. These agreementsshall respect the provisions of this Directive and the relevantnational implementing measures.
3. Member States shall, in accordance with national law,
collective agreements or practice, encourage employers topromote equal treatment for men and women in a plannedand systematic way in the workplace, in access to employment,vocational training and promotion.
4. To this end, employers shall be encouraged to provide at
appropriate regular intervals employees and/or their representa-tives with appropriate information on equal treatment for menand women in the undertaking.
Such information may include an overview of the proportions of
men and women at different levels of the organisation; their payand pay differentials; and possible measures to improve thesituation in cooperation with employees' representatives.
Article 22
Dialogue with non‑governmental organisations
Member States shall encourage dialogue with appropriate non-
governmental organisations which have, in accordance with theirnational law and practice, a legitimate interest in contributing to26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/31 the fight against discrimination on grounds of sex with a view to
promoting the principle of equal treatment.
CHAPTER 3
General horizontal provisions
Article 23
Compliance
Member States shall take all necessary measures to ensure that:
(a) any laws, regulations and administrative provisions con-
trary to the principle of equal treatment are abolished;
(b) provisions contrary to the principle of equal treatment in
individual or collective contracts or agreements, internalrules of undertakings or rules governing the independentoccupations and professions and workers' and employers'organisations or any other arrangements shall be, or maybe, declared null and void or are amended;
(c) occupational social security schemes containing such
provisions may not be approved or extended by adminis-trative measures.
Article 24
Victimisation
Member States shall introduce into their national legal systems
such measures as are necessary to protect employees, includingthose who are employees' representatives provided for bynational laws and/or practices, against dismissal or other adversetreatment by the employer as a reaction to a complaint withinthe undertaking or to any legal proceedings aimed at enforcing
compliance with the principle of equal treatment.
Article 25
Penalties
Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties applicable to
infringements of the national provisions adopted pursuant tothis Directive, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure thatthey are applied. The penalties, which may comprise the paymentof compensation to the victim, must be effective, proportionateand dissuasive. The Member States shall notify those provisionsto the Commission by 5 October 2005 at the latest and shallnotify it without delay of any subsequent amendment affectingthem.Article 26
Prevention of discrimination
Member States shall encourage, in accordance with national law,
collective agreements or practice, employers and those respon-sible for access to vocational training to take effective measuresto prevent all forms of discrimination on grounds of sex, inparticular harassment and sexual harassment in the workplace, inaccess to employment, vocational training and promotion.
Article 27
Minimum requirements
1. Member States may introduce or maintain provisions which
are more favourable to the protection of the principle of equaltreatment than those laid down in this Directive.
2. Implementation of this Directive shall under no circum-
stances be sufficient grounds for a reduction in the level ofprotection of workers in the areas to which it applies, withoutprejudice to the Member States' right to respond to changes inthe situation by introducing laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions which differ from those in force on the notification ofthis Directive, provided that the provisions of this Directive arecomplied with.
Article 28
Relationship to Community and national provisions
1. This Directive shall be without prejudice to provisions
concerning the protection of women, particularly as regardspregnancy and maternity.
2. This Directive shall be without prejudice to the provisions of
Directive 96/34/EC and Directive 92/85/EEC.
Article 29
Gender mainstreaming
Member States shall actively take into account the objective of
equality between men and women when formulating andimplementing laws, regulations, administrative provisions, poli-cies and activities in the areas referred to in this Directive.
Article 30
Dissemination of information
Member States shall ensure that measures taken pursuant to this
Directive, together with the provisions already in force, arebrought to the attention of all the persons concerned by allsuitable means and, where appropriate, at the workplace.L 204/32 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006 
chunk: TITLE IV
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 31
Reports
1. By 15 February 2011, the Member States shall communicate
to the Commission all the information necessary for theCommission to draw up a report to the European Parliamentand the Council on the application of this Directive.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, Member States shall
communicate to the Commission, every four years, the texts ofany measures adopted pursuant to Article 141(4) of the Treaty, aswell as reports on these measures and their implementation. Onthe basis of that information, the Commission will adopt andpublish every four years a report establishing a comparativeassessment of any measures in the light of Declaration No 28annexed to the Final Act of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
3. Member States shall assess the occupational activities
referred to in Article 14(2), in order to decide, in the light ofsocial developments, whether there is justification for maintain-ing the exclusions concerned. They shall notify the Commissionof the results of this assessment periodically, but at least every 8years.
Article 32
Review
By 15 February 2011 at the latest, the Commission shall review
the operation of this Directive and if appropriate, propose anyamendments it deems necessary.
Article 33
Implementation
Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and
administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directiveby 15 August 2008 at the latest or shall ensure, by that date, thatmanagement and labour introduce the requisite provisions byway of agreement. Member States may, if necessary to takeaccount of particular difficulties, have up to one additional yearto comply with this Directive. Member States shall take allnecessary steps to be able to guarantee the results imposed bythis Directive. They shall forthwith communicate to theCommission the texts of those measures.When Member States adopt these measures, they shall contain a
reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such referenceon the occasion of their official publication. They shall alsoinclude a statement that references in existing laws, regulationsand administrative provisions to the Directives repealed by thisDirective shall be construed as references to this Directive.Member States shall determine how such reference is to be madeand how that statement is to be formulated.
The obligation to transpose this Directive into national law shall
be confined to those provisions which represent a substantivechange as compared with the earlier Directives. The obligation totranspose the provisions which are substantially unchangedarises under the earlier Directives.
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the text of
the main provisions of national law which they adopt in the fieldcovered by this Directive.
Article 34
Repeal
1. With effect from 15 August 2009 Directives 75/117/EEC,
76/207/EEC, 86/378/EEC and 97/80/EC shall be repealedwithout prejudice to the obligations of the Member Statesrelating to the time-limits for transposition into national law and
application of the Directives set out in Annex I, Part B.
2. References made to the repealed Directives shall be
construed as being made to this Directive and should be readin accordance with the correlation table in Annex II.
Article 35
Entry into force
This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following its
publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
Article 36
Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.
Done at Strasbourg, 5 July 2006.
For the European Parliament
The President
J. BORRELL FONTELLESFor the Council
The President
P. LEHTOMÄKI26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/33 ANNEX I
PART A
Repealed Directives with their successive amendments
Council Directive 75/117/EEC OJ L 45, 19.2.1975, p. 19
Council Directive 76/207/EEC OJ L 39, 14.2.1976, p. 40
Directive 2002/73/EC of the European Parliament and of
the CouncilOJ L 269, 5.10.2002, p. 15
Council Directive 86/378/EEC OJ L 225, 12.8.1986, p. 40
Council Directive 96/97/EC OJ L 46, 17.2.1997, p. 20
Council Directive 97/80/EC OJ L 14, 20.1.1998, p. 6
Council Directive 98/52/EC OJ L 205, 22.7.1998, p. 66
PART B
List of time limits for transposition into national law and application dates
(referred to in Article 34(1))
Directive Time-limit for transposition Date of application
Directive 75/117/EEC 19.2.1976
Directive 76/207/EEC 14.8.1978Directive 86/378/EEC 1.1.1993
Directive 96/97/EC 1.7.1997 17.5.1990 in relation to workers, except
for those workers or those claimingunder them who had before that dateinitiated legal proceedings or raised anequivalent claim under national law.
Article 8 of Directive 86/378/EEC —
1.1.1993 at the latest.
Article 6(1)(i), first indent of Directive
86/378/EEC –1.1.1999 at the latest.
Directive 97/80/EC 1.1.2001 As regards the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
22.7.2001
Directive 98/52/EC 22.7.2001Directive 2002/73/EC 5.10.2005L 204/34 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006 ANNEX II
Correlation table
Directive 75/117/EEC Directive 76/207/EEC Directive 86/378/EEC Directive 97/80/EC This Directive
— Article 1(1) Article 1 Article 1 Article 1
— Article 1(2) — — —
— Article 2(2), first
indent— — Article 2(1), (a)
— Article 2(2), second
indent— Article 2(2) Article 2(1), (b)
— Article 2(2), third
and fourth indents— — Article 2(1), (c) and (d)
— — — — Article 2(1), (e)
— — Article 2(1) — Article 2(1), (f)
— Article 2(3) and (4)
and Article 2(7) thirdsubparagraph— — Article 2(2)
— Article 2(8) — — Article 3
Article 1 — — — Article 4
— — Article 5(1) — Article 5
— — Article 3 — Article 6
— — Article 4 — Article 7(1)
— — — — Article 7(2)
Article 2(2) Article 8(1)
— — Article 2(3) — Article 8(2)
— — Article 6 — Article 9
— — Article 8 — Article 10
— — Article 9 — Article 11
— — (Article 2 of Direc-
tive 96/97/EC)— Article 12
— — Article 9a — Article 13
— Articles 2(1) and 3
(1)— Article 2(1) Article 14(1)
— Article 2(6) — — Article 14(2)
— Article 2(7), second
subparagraph— — Article 15
— Article 2(7), fourth
subparagraph, sec-
ond and third sen-
tence— — Article 16
Article 2 Article 6(1) Article 10 — Article 17(1)
— Article 6(3) — — Article 17(2)
— Article 6(4) — — Article 17(3)26.7.2006 EN Official Journal of the European Union L 204/35 Directive 75/117/EEC Directive 76/207/EEC Directive 86/378/EEC Directive 97/80/EC This Directive
— Article 6(2) — — Article 18
— — — Articles 3 and 4 Article 19
— Article 8a — — Article 20
— Article 8b — — Article 21
— Article 8c — — Article 22
Articles 3 and 6 Article 3 (2)(a) — — Article 23(a)
Article 4 Article 3(2)(b) Article 7(a) — Article 23(b)
— — Article 7(b) — Article 23(c)
Article 5 Article 7 Article 11 — Article 24
Article 6 — — — —
— Article 8d — — Article 25
Article 2(5) Article 26
— Article 8e(1) — Article 4(2) Article 27(1)
— Article 8e(2) — Article 6 Article 27(2)
— Article 2(7) first
subparagraphArticle 5(2) — Article 28(1)
— Article 2(7) fourth
subparagraph first
sentenceArticle 28(2)
— Article 1(1a) Article 29
Article 7 Article 8 — Article 5 Article 30
Article 9 Article 10 Article 12(2) Article 7, fourth
subparagraphArticle 31(1) and (2)
— Article 9(2) — — Article 31(3)
— — — — Article 32
Article 8 Article 9(1), first
subparagraph and 9(2) and (3)Article 12(1) Article 7, first, sec-
ond and third sub-paragraphsArticle 33
— Article 9(1), second
subparagraph— — —
— — — — Article 34
— — — — Article 35
— — — — Article 36
— — Annex — —L 204/36 EN Official Journal of the European Union 26.7.2006 
